1 
 
 
 
Faculty of Dentistry 
Operative Dentistry Department 
 
 
Dental Anatomy 2 
  
Lecture 1 
 
Prof. Dr. Talaat Abo Hatab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


2 
 
 
Tooth portions (crown & root) 
The enamel, cementum and dentine are the three hard tissues of the tooth, 
and the dentine forms the major bulk of the tooth structure. While, the fourth 
tissue of the tooth is the pulp which is the soft tissue, within the dentin 
providing blood supply, innervation and connective tissue. The primary 
function of the pulp is to produce dentin. 
The pulp consists of two parts, the pulp chamber and the pulp canal. The pulp 
chamber is that part of the dental pulp inside the crown, while the pulp canal 
is inside the root. 
 
The number of roots 
single root as in all anterior teeth, mandibular premolars and maxillary 
second premolars. 
two roots with bifurcation which is the division of the root trunk into two 
branches as in mandibular molars and maxillary first premolars. 


3 
 
three roots with trifurcation which is the division of the root trunk into 
three branches as in maxillary molars. 
Root Trunk is the base of the root of a multirooted tooth. 
Terminal Roots is the branching of the root from the root trunk. 
Apex is the terminal end or tip of the root. 
 
Surfaces of the teeth 
 
The crowns of incisors and canines have 4 surfaces and a ridge and the crowns 
of premolars and molars have 5 surfaces. 
•1.Labial surface: is the surface which is towards the lip in incisors and 
canines (=in anterior teeth). 
•2.Buccal surface: is the surface which is towards the cheek in premolars and 
molars (=in posterior teeth). 
•The labial and buccal surfaces could be termed as the “ Facial surfaces “. 
3.Lingual surface: is the surface which is facing the tongue (all teeth). 
•4.Occlusal surface: is the surface of posterior teeth coming in contact with 
the teeth in the opposite jaw during closing the mouth. In anterior teeth this 
surface is called “ Incisal ridge”. 


4 
 
5.Proximal surface: is the surface of the tooth facing towards adjacent teeth 
in the same dental arch. 
•A. Mesial surface: is the surface which is facing towards the median line. 
•B. Distal surface: is the surface which is facing away from the median line. 
Surfaces of the teeth 
•All teeth have their mesial surfaces touching the distal surfaces of the 
adjacent tooth except the maxillary and mandibular central incisors (both 
permanent and deciduous). 
 
Division of the crown into thirds 
 
 
So, for description, the crown and the root are divided into thirds according to 
the position of the surface. 


5 
 
 
 
 
 
Line angle:  
it is formed by the junction of two surfaces and gets its name from these 
surfaces. For example, mesio-labial line angle. 
 


6 
 
 
 
 


7 
 
Point angle: 
 it is formed by the junction of three surfaces and gets its name from these 
surfaces. For example, mesio-linguo-Incisal point angle. 
 
 
 
 
Great Thanks 




SYRIAN PRIVATE UNIVERSITY








Enamel

Dentine
Pulp
Gum

Cementum

Bone
Blood vessel

Nerve

0+0

7007








يه
سينا

mi

‎Apical‏ زه







Labioincisal ne angle Linguoincisal ne angle

Mesioingual ine angle ‏لومم‎ ine ange
Mesiolaba ine ange Distolbil ne angle





ange
Dstoinguoincisal pont
ange



